More radical preppers don't have any smartphone at all, but simply a Private Mobile Radio (i.e. Digital Mobile Radio walkie talkie), 
or a very simple dumbphone or basic high-end cellphone (like the Light Phone 2).
For those that aren't as radical and still urbanite however, smart phones remain an option.
That said, within the latter group, there are both apple enthusiasts, and android lovers.
This distinction also makes that both have their own smartphones (either Iphone or Android phone), and the 
smart (android) prepper will still want to be able to communicate with apple preppers and vice versa.
So to achieve this, here are the apps you can install (or are standard in the OS) which will work on both:

Main apps:
Phone: for analog calling to any phone, including landlines and dumbphones
Signal: for digital calling (so only to smartphones) + chatting + videocalling
iMessage / (Android) Messages: for SMS/MMS
iMail / Gmail or Email: for e-mail

Additional apps:
Life360: tracking the family
Maps.me: offline maps
Google Earth
TripAdvisor
Compass
Calendar
Notes
Weather
CNN
Google Photos / Apple Photos (set online sharing off, store photos only on harddisk of phone; 
this is just for occasional photos taken with phones and present just a for limited time,
ie for transfer via email or chat) 
Google Translate
Reminders / Google Tasks
Fing
Contacts
Star Chart
Podcasts
LeafSnap
Plantix (Android only)
Books
Music
TV
Ada

Wifi maps programs are not included, because if you don't have wifi on your location, you shouldn't use wifi at all.
Going to a particular location just because they have wifi there is foolishness.

For settings:
Most preppers will want to go cheap, so using prepaid rather than using subscription.
This also has limitations however regarding data use.
To avoid these problems, set settings --> global settings --> refresh in background --> wifi only (no mobile data)
Mobile data can be set off, per program (in settings) and/or globally
Location sharing is best set to "only when I use app" rather than having it share location all the time;
can give some problems with some programs like Life360 however, same with refresh in background
Most smartphones have built-in data use monitoring, so you can use this to make sure all these settings are correct (if not, mobile data use will be high so you can see this).

It is best not to place any files on the smartphone at all so there should be nothing to share.
If you do want to share photos, ... use a regular digital camera and share via an online service such as box.com, or Google Drive or iDrive (but sharing options with the latter to android/pc is limited).
Keep it on/shared for a limited time, untill family members downloaded the files, then make it again unavailable by deleting or putting sharing off. 
Another option is to put the files on an external harddisk and share only via the local network/wifi (so not online) at certain times (ie at family meetings), but is only useful if family members have mobile pc's and if they bring them.
Sharing via bluetooth, such as via Apple's AirDrop (if everyone has an Apple device) or via services like instashare, SHAREit is not recommended and is not very useful.
Photos that are not of the family members and don't need to be private can be shared via an online service such as Amazon Photos or Google Photos.

Apple or Google Wallet, along with 3rd party banking apps are best not present/used.
If you want to allow banking online, use a desktop computer (which has no risk of being stolen, and which always uses a secure/private internet access (phones may automatically use 3rd party wifi if available)
